---
title: "Design and Analysis of Electrically Charged Systems for COVID-19 Decontamination"
excerpt: "Detailed Methodology for our Proposed Research Article."
toc: true
toc_sticky: true

categories:
  - research

tags:
  - COVID-19
  - HVACR
  - Coronavirus
  - ElectroMagnetic Field Theory

last_modified_at: 2020-09-29T08:06:00-05:00

header:
  teaser: "/assets/images/sars-cov-19.jpg"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/sars-cov-19.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
  caption: "Photo credit: [**McKnight Brain Research Foundation**](https://mcknightbrain.org/uf-neuroscientists-study-impact-of-covid-19-social-isolation-on-cognitive-mental-health-of-seniors/)"
  #actions:
  #  - label: "View Documentation"
  #    url: "https://unsplash.com"

use_math: true
---

# Design and Analysis of Electrically Charged Systems for COVID-19 Decontamination

Detailed Methodology & Project Description for our Proposed Research Article.

## Project Objectives

- To design an Electrical System for COVID-19 Decontamination for
  Industrial & Domestic purposes.

- To enhance indoor air quality to nullify any virus agents.

## Project Deliverables

- Fabricated Prototype of Installable Components in HVAC Systems such
  as Air Purifiers, Air Conditioners that act as a virus filter.

- Standalone Prototype Units which work for individual disinfection.

- Testing of Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) purification and test reports
  based on comparisons of the obtained results and previous measures
  of IAQ.

- 3-D simulations of working principles involved.

- Project Report with detailed diagrams and execution photographs of
  the suggested prototype.

## Abstract

This project aims at modifying existing HVAC Systems to install
filtration components for COVID-19 disinfection by the theory of
Electrical Charge Repulsion. Although the main focus on this project is
for the novel coronavirus, we claim that this project will generalize in
decontamination of any virus whatsoever as each and every virus carries
some charged dipolar proteins.

Apart from inventing new systems, this research will attempt
modifications to already existing systems in an inexpensive manner.

## Prerequisite Courses

PW-EE 781 - Project stage-I, ME 604A - Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning, PC-EE 303- Electromagnetic Field Theory.

## Need for this Project

• The COVID-19 pandemic is growing exponentially and as people are
spending more time indoors, proper methods of filter designs are
necessary to battle the spread of this deadly virus.

• This research project proposes an economically viable electrically
charged filtration system and aims at improving indoor air quality (IAQ)
with a high-efficiency rating that provides a healthy atmosphere free
from the virus.

• Existing Filters in the HVAC Industry are insufficient to eliminate
the novel coronavirus from the filtered air as these particles are often
much smaller than the diameter of the virus agent.

• The existing state-of-the-art technology of HEPA (High-Efficiency
Particulate Air) Filters which is capable of filtering particles with
AED (Aerodynamic Equivalent Diameter) of 0.3-microns (0.3 μm) with a
high efficiency of 99.97% (Particulate Matter-PM~0.3~). However, the
problem with these filters is that virus agents often have an
AED\<PM~0.3~. Hence, these particles pass through the virus unfiltered.

• Hence, the proposed solution requires a change in the classical
systems, and postulates the use of mutually perpendicular electrical and
magnetic fields for the suitable deflection of the virus particles,
causing them to subsequently be rejected by the air passing to as input
to the system and can be used to enhance indoor air quality.

• This technology can be further explored for installation and extension
into different air purification technologies and can help prevent viral
infections in the future, should the need/requirement arise.

## Status of the work done

Attempts to eliminate the novel coronavirus have been made but none of
them proposes complete rejection of the virus with 100% efficiency. Our
research proposes an idea that is fully resistant to any viral infection
in the air particles and is aimed at Indoor Air Quality Improvement.

## Detailed Methodology

Every single virus has some dipolar charges associated with its protein
fibers and this can also be used against the virus itself with the help
of some electrical & properties of dipoles.

Therefore, in this project, we provide an alternative to the traditional
filtering systems and replace them with electrical systems that
eliminate viruses by the principle of charge induction with the help of
mutually perpendicular Electrical and Magnetic Fields.

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image1.jpeg)

**Fig.1 Visualization of the novel coronavirus on a microscope**

_Image Source_: StatNews<sup>[1]</sup>

![ISPG1](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image2.png)
_Image Source_: Coronavirus envelope protein: Current knowledge<sup>[2]</sup>

**Fig. 2 Visual Interpretation of the coronavirus Protein Chain Polymers
as Electric Dipoles:** Amino Acid Sequence and Domains of the SARS-CoV E
Protein display dipole like properties: The amino (N) - terminal domain
consists of negatively charged amino acids, the transmembrane domain
(TMD) is neutral, and the carboxy (C)-terminal domain consists of
positively charged Amino Acids. Amino acid properties are indicated:
hydrophobic (red), hydrophilic (blue), polar, charged (asterisks).

## Overview and Operating Principle Involved

In the proposed system, intake air is sent to a filtration unit where
the air is divided into a streamlined beam-like flow with the help of a
pressure valve. This is obtained by maintaining pressure gradients and
uniform elevation. Hence, Bernoulli's Theorem is applicable to the air
particles at this portion of the system.

Mathematically,

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image3.png)

where,

P=Pressure of Air passing through the Filtration Unit

_ρ_=Density of the Air passing through the Filtration Unit

v=Velocity of the Air passing through the Filtration Unit

g=Acceleration due to gravity

h=Elevation of the Filtration Unit

k=Some Arbitrary Constant

![main-qimg-2af6d68b76f3b3c37e4d501b86d10eb2](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image4.png)

_Image Source:_ Quora<sup>[3]</sup>

**Fig 3. Bernoulli's Theorem:** To vary the output velocity (v~2~) of
the fluid, the output pressure (P~2~) needs to get adjusted accordingly.
This procedure for varying the velocity of the fluid to a desired value
is done by using a pressure valve.

This equation can be further simplified as,

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image5.png)

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image5.png)

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image6.png)

(Assuming elevation is same, h1=h2)

where,

1=Initial Intake before Entering the Filtration Unit

2=Intermediate Air Passing through the Filtration Unit

From the above equation, the value of Output Velocity (v~2~) can be
obtained knowing the other variables.

Now, the virus particles which basically consist of protein chain
polymers and are dipoles can be exposed to mutually perpendicular
electrical and magnetic fields.

![ISPG3](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image7.png)

_Image Source:_ Motion of an electric dipole in a static electromagnetic
field<sup>[4]</sup>

**Fig 4. Schematic Diagram of a Molecular Polarizer:** Two horizontal
molecular polarizers P1 and P2 sandwich a region of crossed magnetic and
electric fields directed along the +y and --z axes, respectively. A long
molecule with an electric dipole moment oriented along its axis is shown
entering the device with a translation velocity at the +x direction.

This dipole when experiencing mutually perpendicular Electric and
Magnetic fields, begins to rotate due to an induced Torque (
![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image8.wmf)), given by the mathematical equation,

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image9.wmf)

where,

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image8.wmf)=Net Torque acting on the dipole P

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image10.wmf)= Dipole Moment of the dipole P

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image11.wmf)= Applied Electric Field to the Dipole P

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image12.wmf)= Applied Magnetic Field to the Dipole P &

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image13.wmf)= Translational Velocity of the Dipole P

Hence, a suitable static electromagnetic field is generated across the
passing air through the Filtration Unit which screens the coronavirus
cells by rotating them at 90 degrees in motion. However the suitable
distance (d) between the two polarizers can only be obtained after
experimentation with the virus protein dipole itself.

Since these virus agents also have some initial translatory motion
associated with them, the vector addition result of this linear motion
and rotation leads them to separation from the initial air sample by the
polarizer apparently rejecting the rotating the dipoles when kept at the
distance (d).

After extraction, these virus agents are sent to a collector, where the
virus is stored till it becomes inactive or it is destroyed using some
chemicals. This process is explained in detail below.

## Components Required

• Air Purification System -- Basic Initial System that purifies air
using HEPA Filters. This can be any preliminary system such as Air
Purifiers or Air Conditioners over which our project will install
additional equipment on existing systems and will have minimum
interference with the standalone working of such classical systems.

• Pipes -- To circulate the intake air to the proposed system.

• Input Pressure Valve -- To control and modify the input velocity of
the air to be fed into the system.

• Polarizers -- a polarizer by milling nano-sized slits through an
impermeable membrane^\[6\]^.

• Electric and Magnetic Field Generator Setups -- This can be done using
the principle of Electromagnetic Field Induction (EMI) with Solenoids
and Rotating Coils of an AC Motor to induce the Fields using the AC
Supply.

• Output Pressure Valve- To control and modify the output velocity of
the air to be fed into the classical HEPA system.

## Integration into existing HVAC Systems

This project aims at modifying existing HVAC Systems to install
filtration components for COVID-19 disinfection by the theory of
Electrical Charge Repulsion. Although the main focus on this project is
for the novel coronavirus, we claim that this project will generalize in
decontamination of any virus whatsoever as each and every virus carries
some charged dipolar proteins.

Apart from inventing new systems, this research will attempt
modifications to already existing systems in an inexpensive manner. A
schematic diagram for the setup used in collaboration with the existing
HVAC Systems. In the figure below in place of the normal air filter, we
will use our proposed air filter with the default air filtration system.

![](/assets/images/Covid_Decontamination/media/image14.jpeg)

**Fig 5. Schematic Diagram of the Proposed System:** The proposed filter
will not change the working dynamics of the existing classical systems;
instead it will attempt to be installed in these systems with suitable
modifications.

## Future Scope and Research

The major disadvantage of the methodology mentioned in the project is
that the coronavirus cells are aggregated in the collector and remain
active for some days before finally becoming dead cells. It would be
best to destroy these cells at the time of entry detection itself. But
this procedure itself poses its own problem and issues.

To solve this issue, a high electromagnetic field is generated across
the passing air and this leads to unstable coronavirus cells, which
ultimately leads to the decomposition of these viruses by destroying
their protein chain polymers. However, such high fields are almost
impossible to generate, require specialized equipment, and can be
dangerous to handle itself.

However, administering the cleansing of the collector can be done using
many techniques but requires safety precautions and can be done using
some chemical compounds through suitable reactions for virus
destruction<sup>[5]</sup>. Some of the methods are:

1.  Using 0.1% Sodium Hypochlorite Solution (NaClO-Cl~2~ Bleach
    Solution) or 0.5% Hydrogen Peroxide Solution (H~2~O~2~) to oxidize
    and destroy virus proteins and genetic material.

2.  Using 70% Alcohol Solution (Isopropanol) to dissolve virus fat
    layers and damage virus protein structures.

## Authors with Contact Details

- Rounik Roy, Mob.: 9609003695,\
  Mail ID:
  [[rounikroy72@gmail.com]](mailto:rounikroy72@gmail.com)

- Namrata Das, Mob.: 9679166333,\
  Mail ID:
  [[namratads.blg@gmail.com]](mailto:namratads.blg@gmail.com)

- Farhan Hai Khan, Mob.: 746402755,\
  Mail ID:
  [[njrfarhandasilva10@gmail.com]](mailto:njrfarhandasilva10@gmail.com)

## Review and References

\[1\] Observed Coronavirus Particles under a Microscope, Highly
Magnified, Statnews.

[[statnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Coronavirus-CDC-645x645.jpg]](https://www.statnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Coronavirus-CDC-645x645.jpg)

\[2\] Schoeman, D., Fielding, B.C. Coronavirus envelope protein: current
knowledge. _Virol J_ 16, 69 (2019).
[[doi.org/10.1186/s12985-019-1182-0]](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-019-1182-0)

\[3\] Bernoulli's Equation, A. Shrikoti, IITR.
[[quora.com/What-is-the-statement-of-Bernoullis-equation]](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-statement-of-Bernoullis-equation)

\[4\] Mungan, Carl & Lasinski, Andrew. (2008). Motion of an electric
dipole in a static electromagnetic field. Latin-American Journal of
Physics Education. 2. 192-194.
[[researchgate.net/publication/26568536_Motion_of_an_electric_dipole_in_a_static_electromagnetic_field]](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/26568536_Motion_of_an_electric_dipole_in_a_static_electromagnetic_field)

\[5\] Four Ways to Destroy Coronavirus, Compound Interest.
[[compoundchem.com/2020/03/31/destroy-coronavirus/]](https://www.compoundchem.com/2020/03/31/destroy-coronavirus/)

\[6\] Frabboni, S., Gazzadi, G. C., and Pozzi, G., Young's double-slit
interference experiment with electrons Am. J. Phys. 75, 1053--1055
(2007).
[[doi.org/10.1119/1.2757621]](https://doi.org/10.1119/1.2757621)

_Miscellaneous_

\[6\] Air Pollution Control Technology EPA CICA Fact Sheet, Fabric
Filter: HEPA and ULPA Types, Particulate Matter Size and AED.
[[https://www3.epa.gov/ttncatc1/cica/files/ff-hepa.pdf]](https://www3.epa.gov/ttncatc1/cica/files/ff-hepa.pdf)

**National Status Review**

1.  Dipole Orientation in Molecular Proteins: Insights.

2.  Electromagnetic Wave Amplitude Modulation.

3.  Understanding Mutually Perpendicular Electric & magnetic Fields.

4.  Spectral Results and Analysis of Electrical Dipole Rotation.

5.  Virus Detection using Protein Chain Polymers containing Charges.

1\. Vasanthi, G, Krishnaswamy, S, Dipole moment analysis of membrane
proteins suggests role in orientation in the membrane, NISCAIR-CSIR,
India, 93-100, IJBB Vol.39(2) \[April 2002\].
hdl.handle.net/123456789/19757

2\. M S Sodha, A K Arora and P K Kaw, Amplitude modulation of
electromagnetic waves by alternating magnetic fields, Journal of Physics
A:

General Physics, Vol 1, No 1. doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/1/1/312

3\. K.V. Bhagwat, Selvakumar V. Nair, P. Chaddah, Mutually perpendicular
magnetic fields parallel to a slab a test case for the critical state
model,

Physica C: Superconductivity, Vol 227, (1--2), p.p. 176-182.
doi.org/10.1016/0921-4534(94)90371-9

4\. Lakshman, S V.J.; Rangachar, M R, Selection rules in electric dipole,
magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole transitions, Indian J. Pure
Appl. Phys Vol: 19:8, p.p. 698-708. osti.gov/etdeweb/biblio/6299703

5\. Kaushik, A., Yndart, A., Kumar, S. _et al._ A sensitive
electrochemical immunosensor for label-free detection of Zika-virus
protein. _Sci Rep_ 8, 9700 (2018). doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-28035-3

**International Status Review**

1\. Comprehensive Structure of the Coronavirus Agent:

Protein Fibres and Charge Distribution.

2\. Protein Data Bank of the Coronavirus Agent.

3\. Electromagnetic Field Theory: Dynamics for an

Electric Dipole.

4\. Virus Detection in Ventilation Filters.

5\. HVAC Microbiological Control for Indoor Air Quality

improvement.

1\. Schoeman, D., Fielding, B.C. Coronavirus envelope protein: current
knowledge. Virol J 16, 69 (2019). doi.org/10.1186/s12985-019-1182-0

2\. Li, W. Structurally Observed Electrostatic Features of the COVID-19
Coronavirus-Related Experimental Structures inside Protein Data Bank: A
Brief Update. Preprints 2020, 2020030081.
doi.org/10.20944/preprints202003.0081.v1

3\. Mungan, Carl & Lasinski, Andrew. (2008). Motion of an electric dipole
in a static electromagnetic field. Latin-American Journal of Physics
Education. 2. 192-194.
researchgate.net/publication/26568536_Motion_of_an_electric_dipole_in_a_static_electromagnetic_field

4\. Goyal, Sagar M _et al._ "Detection of viruses in used ventilation
filters from two large public buildings." _American journal of infection
control_ vol. 39,7 (2011): e30-8. doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2010.10.036

5\. Schmidt, M.G., Attaway, H.H., Terzieva, S. _et al._ Characterization
and Control of the Microbial Community Affiliated with Copper or
Aluminum Heat Exchangers of HVAC Systems. _Curr Microbiol_ 65, 141--149
(2012). doi.org/10.1007/s00284-012-0137-0

# Complete Article

You can view or <a href="https://github.com/khanfarhan10/khanfarhan10.github.io/raw/master/PDF_docs/Covid_Decontamination.pdf" download>download this article</a>

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/viewer?srcid=1JOVg2vlh7VMPx-X5GS4gC8UvLHzjIm6L&pid=explorer&efh=false&a=v&chrome=false&embedded=true" style="width:100%; height:900px;" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<!--
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1JOVg2vlh7VMPx-X5GS4gC8UvLHzjIm6L/view?usp=sharing
-->
